I'll talk about types of stories and how I classify
history.
even before starting to write.
It's important to at least know
Which universe am I referring to when I discuss the
story I'm currently writing about and developing?
classifying the universe of a story in some way makes
you reflect on
What are you writing about? Consider the key elements
essential for developing your project. Reflect on the
As we see here. the story presents itself as a timeline
where our observation highlights that the most
crucial aspect is the substantial and meaningful
transformation experienced by the character at this
journey's end. This significant change in values leaves
us with uncertainty. With my initial concept for the
possible narrative firmly planted. i am now left
wondering: What are the next steps I must take?
How is it classified? Which planet is my story from?
What does it resemble? Which movie or book does it
remind me of? Essentially. we're identifying the key
elements. These elements are unique to this story type
and not others. helping us understand its core.
that are common to this particular type of story and
not to others. For this. there is a vast classification
system for categorizing stories. and I've selected some
for us to play with and start completing our project
folder.
The primary step involves recognizing the existence of
four essential components necessary for categorizing
any narrative. These include aspects tied to reality.
such as how we depict our universe's truth. the
stylistic choices made in world-building. and
considerations regarding character development and
What are the characters' attributes and traits? What's
the narrator's perspective? In other words. who is
actually telling this story? Understanding these
elements is crucial.
Let's delve into all aspects concerning the design of
this narrative first and foremost.
The first thing we need to ask is what kind of
structure does this story have?
We will conduct a private session focusing on
structural elements. examining everything pertinent to
composition and function.
But the key question now is whether this story I'm
about to create can be divided into three acts. If it
it implies there's a beginning. a middle. and an end.
with conflict at its core. This structure guides the
a beginning. a middle. and an end. where conflict is
central. This story could have three major development
phases. each crucial to the narrative's progression.
Or is it a narrative unfolding backwards. slowly
unveiled bit by bit. similar to how one would assemble
or pieces of a puzzle. akin to the way this film may
progress?
Or... It's a story that's so experimental it's very
strange to tell
that cannot be split into three sections. that cannot
be fragmented into particles and moments. but maintains
continuity. like someone filming with a camera.
capturing an unbroken sequence.
Considering an entire sequence plan for a full night.
or specific structures that are quite experimental.
Which of these options do you believe aligns best with
your narrative? I feel the tale I'm crafting follows a
classic three-act structure. and we must determine
which variant suits our story most effectively.
Is this a tale that begins with the protagonist having
little worth. which then dramatically increases by the
conclusion? Alternatively. could it be a narrative
where an initially highly valued individual ends up
Is it a three-act story of gain or a three-act story of
loss? That's the first major classification. which we
could call the structural classification.
which involves design. The next crucial design
classification is the format you'll choose for your
Will it be a documentary. web series. or film?
In what format will this story be defined? Is it a
documentary. a web series. a feature film. a TV movie.
short film. or a series? Each format establishes
distinct characteristics and specific requirements.
will explore in due time.
specific requirements that we will see in due time. But
at least we can know that the story I want to write.
such as making a feature film. aligns with design
principles involving structure and format. Now let's
into the third aspect of this design process. where we
explore further details related to these elements.
The temporal design involves narrating the story
continuously from past to future. reflecting how events
unfold in reality.
What would be an appropriate manner to describe a
narrative that continues uninterrupted? As mentioned
it could refer to continuous storytelling or starting
from the very beginning. However. is there also a
method where one initially shares part of the tale.
then delves into its middle section before eventually
and there we will grasp the essence of our journey
leading up to that pivotal moment—an altered timeline.
known as in medias res. Alternatively. should we
recount our tale starting solely from its conclusion?
narratives begin at the very end. with the final scene.
encapsulating everything that came before it.
At the start. we explore how we arrived here and trace
back to the story's beginning. This is known as in
extremis narration. Next. we consider the design
related to the narrator or point of view. The narrative
The narrator or point of view can vary in several ways.
A critical aspect to consider is who is actually
narrating the story. There are generally three main
categories: the first being an imaginary figure within
the story.
to be recounted by the character experiencing it. A
protagonist narrator. as seen in this film. The same
narrator who shares the film's story also lives through
the events. You might say. well. this is common in
well. that happens in most films. but it doesn’t. There
are characters where...
it's not about the film's main character; instead. we
have a witness narrator much like Sam as he supports
Frodo throughout his journey in The Lord of the Rings.
Alternatively. my narrative features no clear
protagonist or witness narrator but rather an observer
who compiles the story after all events have
transpired.
Imagine a movie scene where a character uncovers an old
chest. receives a mysterious letter. or just misses
being present when an elderly relative recounts tales
from their youth. serving as a narrator for the
The narrative is somehow extracted from the past and
retold through a different perspective or individual.
From one perspective. we might say there's a
protagonist. witness. or archaeologist narrator. Which
your film? It's a choice to consider and decide upon
carefully.
Let's now move on to the world of characters.
A very significant world. In the realm of characters.
we define the conflict that will impact this character
in my story.
You might say. i still don't know because I haven't
started writing about it yet. But it's important to
some intuition about what the main conflict is that
we're likely to find in your character. Is it a
situational conflict? Where. for example. a character
finds themselves trapped in a challenging situation or
struggling against external forces?
hostage. or in an awkward family situation. Is it a
social scenario. perhaps involving societal pressures?
The social conflict involves an individual battling
against societal disparities or feeling endangered by
prevailing norms and structures. This struggle can be
primarily metaphysical. much like the existential
dilemma faced in 'Blade Runner.' where personal fate
intertwines with broader societal issues.
God or who is my creator? Is the main conflict
internal? I mean. is it about a character seemingly
indifferent on the surface but grappling with a
profound identity crisis or an unfulfilled search?
be a relational struggle where one's relationships
reflect deeper existential questions?
for example. one person loves another. but the other
doesn't love back? Or is there a friendship conflict
where one wants to be empathetic. but the other isn't?
Or is it a universe conflict where someone gets
trapped in an elevator
or gets stranded on an island during a tsunami? What's
the central conflict? Another way to examine the
character is through the story's core argument. Every
narrative has a core argument. which we'll explore in
the next lesson. At this stage. we'll understand that
each story presents a fundamental argument that drives
The plot explores a unique world of films. For
instance. it includes narratives where characters aim
invent or construct things and others where they seek
to eliminate obstacles. such as figuratively
like Jaws. killing a monster. killing someone. There's
a plot about traveling and living an adventure. like
Indiana Jones. There are plots related to personal
growth and resolving conflicts.
things just happen and resolve personal issues. Do you
think if you understand things. travel. and resolve
the past like Back to the Future? Or find love? There
are plots where a character goes through their entire
life.
like in Forrest Gump or many biopics. There are plots
where someone violently challenges the status quo. for
example. in The Hunger Games or any movie or narrative
where a hero goes against the system. There are films
where someone seeks revenge as a final motive.
Is it a plot where a mystery is solved. similar to The
Arrival. where we question the strangers' intentions
and message? Whatever the scenario. your film aligns
with a foundational plot. It could involve unraveling
and you don't need to fit into any of these
classifications; you can create your own classification
argument because it's healthy to reflect on what you're
telling yourself. Once we've done that. we return to
the broader context of reality. This vital context
helps us understand the plausibility adjustment of your
film more clearly.
Let’s move now to reality. Um...
a crucial aspect of storytelling. In reality. we must
assess the context where our film takes place. There
are three main film contexts: a public world context.
like Rocky. where events are widely known. a private
world context. and a secret bubble context.
where there's a fight. and if this movie were real.
we'd have heard about it on TV and the news. It's a
that goes beyond the private realm and transcends. like
an asteroid heading for Earth. We'd know about that
because it impacts everyone. These are public world
movies. capturing events that grip the attention of the
In the public world context. there exist private realms
where minor tales unfold. impacting solely an
individual's life and intimate relationships; these
secrets remain hidden from even their most trusted
confidants.
For instance. adel's life is like a private world film
or a secret bubble film. where the events are
obscured. and we may never fully understand them
because the character is confined within a particular
reality system. This encapsulation creates a narrative
that remains enigmatic and elusive.
that keeps it contained. similar to the film Get Out.
where a character is ensnared in a sort of hidden
bubble. unable to break free from its confines.
with their girlfriend’s family and within a secret
bubble. Is your film in a private world. secret bubble.
public world context? That’s what I always ask in my
project. Regarding reality. i ask about the
verisimilitude level
that this movie has.
What I'm describing is a realistic film with the native
laws of the physical universe. where there's time.
where there are tables. where there are lights. Or it's
a film of altered reality.
When discussing altered reality. we identify three
types: magical reality. like in Harry Potter; science
fiction reality. which can be biological sci-fi like
The Fly; or physical sci-fi like Avengers.
Which movie would you choose: one set in a physically
possible world like the Marvel Cinematic Universe. but
with significant alterations from our reality. or an
outright supernatural tale such as The Conjuring?
or it might be a realistic film. where within the realm
of reality. a style of realism is applied. which
could be gothic or expressionist in nature. offering a
unique perspective.
it could be a film noir movie. steeped in its unique
reality codes. or a documentary-style film where events
unfold on screen that would never transpire in everyday
life. yet we accept them as true. For example. in
romantic comedies. situations arise that
someone runs through an airport and tells a crowd to
tell someone they love them. and the crowd responds.
acting like a messenger. but in reality. it doesn't
happen. Well. that's the reality of cinema. and there's
guy
of reality or adapting to it. especially in American
romantic comedies. There's a style of naturalistic
cinema like René Man's. where reality is starkly
concrete and profoundly influences the character. This
approach contrasts with the often exaggerated scenarios
typical in romantic comedies.
We also encounter hyperrealism levels. Remember the
Blair Witch Project? Such projects create a direct
connection through a recording system. like a camera.
making the film seem realistic yet inevitably
unrealistic. simulating reality entirely.
That makes the movie inevitably unrealistic. as it
tries to completely simulate reality. Ultimately. this
places the film in a world that is merely plausible. In
the grand scheme of things. movies like these can
exist within their own separate universe. distinct from
our own.
like Terry Gilliam's Brazil. star Wars. or Game of
Thrones. each serves as an example of an alternate
universe. distinct from our own. yet intricately
crafted.
present. future. or past. or if this happens in this
universe. And if the movies happen in this universe.
they can be movies of the past. movies of the present.
or movies of the future. Understanding the time in
which this movie takes place and the level of the
universe also gives us insights to write our story.
Finally. a classification like this helps in
approaching a film.
In the end... But also at the beginning. And at the
beginning. it asks the key questions that make you sit
a table. reflect. and say. "Actually. this film comes
from this planet." Each of them. each of these
elements.
It establishes the parameters and addresses the crucial
issue of which universe is being depicted. delving
into its origins while jotting down observations in a
notebook. writing script. or coding process
for the script folder. everything discovered. Okay. now
let's see in the script folder
How do I fill out the classification of a story?
I've made some progress on the story and have a new
title. Some elements are still in flux. while others
more settled. like Turbulence. in Transit. ten Thousand
Feet. feet on the Ground. and For Journey. These
Aerial disasters. titles that might not last long. but
for now. i'll show them to you. They're there.
existing for the moment. awaiting their fate.
The first summary of the story. i've also been working
a bit more to develop it. I'm going to read it to you
because it's important for us to see the story's
features. Miguel. 29. is a biologist specializing in
studying bacteria that live in extreme conditions like
Antarctica.
The problem is that he'll never be able to travel
because he's afraid of flying. It's a real phobia. In
eccentric center where they offer therapy to overcome
the fear of planes. he meets Antonia. She's a woman
slightly older than him who is moving to New Zealand
and also suffers from a fear of flying. They meet and
share the unusual therapy.
which incorporates a flight simulation cabin. visits to
airports. and an actual flight with therapists. Over
the five-week program. miguel will experience the
sensation of having flown numerous hours. enduring
simulated turbulence alongside Antonia. He will ponder
whether she could have been his ideal partner. as they
navigate this unique therapy together.
In any case. he knows the future of the relationship is
highly unlikely. because once they overcome their
fear of flying.
and they will inevitably drift apart. Well. that's the
summary of the story. Notice how it changed a bit from
what we wrote in the previous session.
The structures are 3
acts.
with loss. Because in the end. in these three acts. we
will end with the character not achieving what they
wanted. But really. when someone loses in a system.
there can also be a gain of another kind. Naturally.
we'll add more later. This understanding reveals a
which is the understanding that the character...
by going through these three acts
He lost but ultimately gained something. We see three
acts of loss: in the first act. he's down. then rises.
meets Antonia. and loses her.
The character rises. meets Antonia. but loses her. or
the chance of unrequited love. then finds an
opportunity to excel in another life area. The format
is a feature film. structured in three acts of loss and
The temporal design is
with
Meaning I'm telling this story in an orderly.
chronological way.
It's a protagonist narrator. told by Miguel.
is the point
of
view
only
and him
happens
the story.
As you can see. this is a thoughtful piece reflecting
on the history we're creating together. I plan to spend
some time working on it and will let you know once it's
complete.
I have just completed outlining the story's features up
to this point. As previously mentioned. these
elements can change multiple times. and we can adjust
certain criteria. However. for now. we have a three-act
structure that focuses on themes of loss and its
impact.
feature-length format. continuous temporal design.
meaning it's told in order and chronologically. The
narrator is the protagonist narrator. miguel telling.
with the single perspective he's experiencing.
Regarding the characters. the main conflict is
Miguel's. which is circumstantial. Miguel is in love
Antonia. but whatever therapy concludes. she will
follow. The internal conflict is that Miguel is afraid
flying and must fly.
Miguel doesn’t believe in love. yet finds the right
person despite himself. Relational conflict.
Antonia is married.
And Miguel. Is ending things with his ex.
But his ex isn't ready to end things and wants
relationship therapy. This is common; revisiting.
breakup with his ex isn't just relational conflict.
When another person opposes the protagonist's dramatic
vector. we'll delve deeper into this in the future.
exploring how these dynamics unfold and affect the
it has a dramatic vector opposing the protagonist's.
This is common; you write something and feel uncertain.
doubting its quality. This happens frequently in the
creative process.
My advice: it's better to have something bad on paper
than good in your head.
Just write it. You can always change it later. If it's
not good. it will disappear. but if it has potential.
it will eventually come back to you.
Made a note here; under other circumstances. they might
have been a great couple. we’ll never know; fearing
flying. not exactly the wild and brave. actually quite
cowardly. and that's a big problem.
The central argument revolves around the universal
theme of discovering love. The narrative unfolds within
the intimate worlds of Miguel and Antonia. each
experiencing their own private journey in this personal
Regarding verisimilitude. it's a realistic.
naturalistic romantic comedy. Set in a universe that
This universe is set in present-day Chile. specifically
in 2020. within an urban and wintry environment. The
tone reflects our current world. which is heavily
influenced by virtual relationships. shaping how we
transitory and volatile. and in full transformation.
everyone migrates. but some people feel they don't fit
in. We're talking about an urban romantic drama with a
teenage and adult audience.
I believe it is essential to delve into the realm of
fleeting connections and grasp the true symbolism
individuals who hesitate to take flight or yearn for
it. There remains so much to uncover in this narrative.
which makes our exploration all the more captivating.
We are embarking on a profound journey.
However. this path now includes a parameter and a
framework. In the upcoming lesson. i'll discuss the DNA
a screenwriter's craft. focusing on the fundamental
elements of the plot.